In this lesson you're going to learn how to use a socket.
Don I owe to transfer data between these server and the client in real time.
Now together in this lesson we're going to work on a little side project so we're not actually going
to set up what's necessary for the chat app.
Instead we'll be creating a little counter application which we'll talk about in a couple of moments.
Once we know how to use socket dot I in the next lesson it'll be your challenge to start creating the
code necessary for the chat app.
So let's go ahead and get started.
In this lesson by creating our little counter application now the account Apple will be a very simple
application allowing us to illustrate how we can use a sound get down I O for real time apps.
The server is going to store a single number called the count and it will share that count with all
connected clients.
The client will render that count in the browser and it will also show the user a button that they can
click to increment the account.
Once the server has the incremented count it will share the new count with all connected clients and
they'll all have their data updated.
So let's go ahead and get started by figuring out how to transfer data from server to client because
what we're going to do initially is share the current count with every connected client.
So right here.
Once a new connection comes in we want to send them the current account.
Now we don't have a count so let's go ahead and create one.
Let count equal zero and down below.
The goal is to send that count back to the client that just opened the connection to get started.
We have to change the parameters that this function accepts.
Right now it's not accepting any though it does get called with an argument right here.
We're going to call that socket socket is an object and it contains information about that new connection.
So right here we can use methods on socket to communicate with that specific client.
Remember if I have five clients connecting to the server this function is going to run five different
times one time for each new connection.
So all we're going to do is add a single line of code right here that sends some data back to that newly
connected client and to do that we use a method on socket which is socket dot emit.
So when we're working with socket dot I O and we're transferring data we are sending and receiving what
are called events.
So right now what I want to do is send an event from the server and I want to receive that event on
the client.
So right here to send an event we use socket dot admit on the server an event is made up of at least
one thing the name of the event.
So in this case there is a built in one called The Connection.
We are going to go ahead and setup a custom one.
Almost all of your events are gonna be custom fitting the needs of your application.
Right here what we're going to do is create a count updated event.
This will be used to send to the initial count to the client and it will also be used later on to send
any changes to the account.
Right here we could just have this in place.
That would be a enough.
We could also send some data which we'll talk about in just a moment.
So right now we are omitting the event from the server to the client.
The problem is that the client is not doing anything to accept it.
So let's make some changes in chat dot J.S..
First up the return value from the IO function that needs to be stored in a variable because we're going
to want to access it in this file a new constant and for that we'll call the constant socket and we'll
set it equal to the function's return value.
So we already had socket on the server that's available right here when the new connection comes in
on the client.
When we initialize the connection we now also get access to socket.
And this is going to allow us to send events and receive events from both the server and the client
now down below.
We don't want to send an event just yet.
We want to receive the event that the server is sending to us and to do that.
We use a different method available on socket which is socket dot on on like we've seen on the server
except two arguments.
The name of the event we call to this count updated and a function to run when that event occurs.
Now it's important that the name right here matches up exactly with the name you picked over here inside
of that function in chat dot J S we can go ahead and do something like render a little message the account
has an updated.
Perfect.
Now then we have this in place.
Let's make sure this message at least shows up.
I would expect it to show up a single time when I first connect what I'm going to do is make sure all
of my files are saved from the browser.
I'm going to crack open the console.
You can use the keyboard shortcut if you know it.
Otherwise more tools developer tools.
Right here we have the console tab which is great.
I'm going to refresh the page to make sure I initialize that connection once again.
And what do I get.
The account has been updated is printing.
So this is fantastic.
It is our server sending some information to the client now.
Currently it's not sending any data just to the event is occurring and the client knows that we could
also transfer data such as the value for account to do that.
We just provide it as a another argument.
So right here count now anything we provide on a minute past that first argument which is the event
name is gonna be available from the callback function on the client.
So right here we're providing a single thing for that callback function count.
And over in the client we can access that right here by providing a name.
Now I could call it count since that makes sense but in reality I could call it whatever I wanted to.
This name can be completely unique.
It is the order that matters.
So right here the second argument is the first argument for the callback function.
I'm going to go ahead and save the server file and over in chat dot J S we're gonna make sure that we
print this count as well.
What I'm gonna do is just add a second argument on to console dialog to dump that count to the terminal
and then we're gonna save all of our files and refresh the browser another time right here.
I give it a refresh and what do I see I see my message with the number 0 right on the end.
So at this point we are sending data from server to client and that is a great start.
What we want to do now though is allow the client to send some data to the server.
What we're going to do is allow the client to click a button to increment that count.
Let's go ahead and figure out how we're gonna get this done.
First up let's go ahead and create a button in index down HDL.
So inside of the body I'm going to add the button just below my chat app.
Text right here we'll create that new button and we'll provide the text plus one.
And we're also going to set up an I.D. for this button so we can easily target it from javascript.
I'll go ahead and set the I.D. equal to something like increment perfect.
Now that we have the button in place let's go ahead and add an event listener and chat dot J S we want
to do something every single time that button is clicked right here.
Well we're going to do is first select it.
So like we've done a few sections ago.
We'll be using document dot query selector to grab just a single element by its I.D..
So right here inside of quotes we start with the hash sign then the I.D. value which we called increment.
And from there we can store this on a variable and access it later or we could simply chain a another
method call to add event listener which is exactly what I'm going to do.
Now the event we're trying to listen for is called click and then we'll set up the function to run whenever
that button is clicked right here console dot log printing clicked to the terminal.
Now let's go ahead and make sure we're at least seeing that show up and if we are that is a great start
over here I can see we have a whole bunch of errors.
This is perfectly normal sense node man.
Shut down the server and restarted it.
So we temporarily lost connection but the client did indeed auto reconnect.
If I go ahead and refresh things I can see my plus one button.
And if I click it I can see my clicked message showing up one time for each time it's clicked.
Now what I want to do is emit an event from the client and have that event listen to for on the server.
So essentially the opposite of what we just did where we emitted from the server and listened on the
client.
So right here when someone clicks that button what am I going to do I'm going to use socket dot emit
this time though from the client right here.
What I'm going to do is provide a name for this event.
I'll call it something like increment.
And in this case I don't need to send any data across since the server knows the current count.
And it's just going to add one to it.
So right here from the client this is enough.
Next up we have to make sure we're listening for this event on the server and responding accordingly.
So over inside of index dot J S if we want to listen of for an event what we do is we add something
else inside of this function right here.
So down below we have to use socket dot on this time using socket dot on from the server.
Now what are we listening for.
I am listening for an event called increment and when I get increment i will provide the function to
run.
Now the question is what do I want to do.
Well in this case what I want to do is one increment the account.
So let's start there.
That is count plus plus.
Next up I want to make sure that the client gets the updated count.
So right here that'll be socket.
I I'm going to emit count updated exactly like I did above and I will provide the account as the data
that I'm sending.
Now we should be able to see that count actually change.
Make sure to save all of the files on both the server and the client from the browser.
I'm going to give things a quick refresh right here.
What I'm going to do is click that button.
And what do I see down below.
I can see that my count is indeed updating in real time which is a fantastic step in the right direction.
Now what I want to take a moment to do is open up a another client as well.
So right here what I'm gonna do is take local host three thousand and copy it to the clipboard and then
going to open up a another browser I'm going to put this over on the right hand side so I can see both
at the exact same time.
And once I have both browser windows open I'll make sure both are navigated to local host three thousand
and I'll crack open the dev tools for this second one now what I should see is a message saying that
the account has been updated to four and that's true by the time that this particular client connects
the account is indeed.
Now the problem is that if this client changes the count only this client gets notified about the chain
shed to prove that all we have to do is click the button.
I'm seeing the message the account has been updated over here but I'm not seeing it over here and that's
a problem.
So to fix that all we need to do is make a small change to how we're emitting the event on the server
when we use socket dot emit we are emitting the event to a particular connection in this case.
We don't want to limit it to just a single connection.
I want to emit it to every connection available.
So we're going to comment out that line which is not working for us and we're going to replace it with
a similar though slightly different one instead of calling socket dot emit.
We'll be calling I O dot emit.
This is going to emit the event to every single connection that's currently available.
And we are going to emit the exact same event.
That is count updated with the exact same data.
So right here as the second argument I'll provide the account.
So these two lines are very similar.
This one emits an event to that specific connection.
This one emits the event to every single connection.
And in this case that is exactly what we want.
So what we're going to do is make sure that we save these server file.
I'm going to go over to Chrome and I'm going to refresh those browser windows right here I have the
first one and in the background I have the second one.
Now when I refresh them both of them start off at zero.
And that's correct.
The server has restarted.
So that count has been reset over here what I'm going to do is click plus 1 and now both in real time
have that data available even though this client wasn't the one that changed the count.
It did get notified about that change and the same would be true if I clicked plus one over here.
Both of the clients are indeed getting that data updated in real time as soon as the button is clicked
we can see the data changing.
So at this point we now know how to use socket dot I O to send data back and forth between the server
and the client.
If we wanted to we could always go ahead and take this count and actually render it to the user interface.
But in this case this little count example is just being used to illustrate some of the basic principles
of socket Don.
Oh so for now that's where we're going to leave the user interface though don't worry when we create
the chat app we will be building out a complete UI.
Now with this in place let's take a quick moment to recap what we've just covered so we can make sure
we actually understand what's going on as in the next lesson it's going to be up to you to emit and
listen to custom events to create some functionality for that chat app.
Right here what we really have is a socket Don Io server that does two things right here.
We have those two things.
These server emits an event that the client receives.
This is called account updated and the client emits an event that the server receives and this is called
increment.
That's all we're doing.
So when a new connection comes in the first thing the server does is it sends the current count to that
specific connection.
Notice I'm using socket dammit here and not I.
Oh dammit if I used I 0 dammit here every time a new client joined old clients would get the account
data and that's a waste because the account hasn't changed so there's no need to send it to everyone.
Now the client receives this event over here and when it gets it it logs the data out to the terminal.
Now that is the first event right here where the server omits any client receives the second one is
when the client admits and the server receives in this case the client emits the increment event when
the button is clicked.
Now it doesn't provide any data but none is necessary.
It's simply enough for the server to run the function when that event occurs.
The function it changes the account incrementing it by one and then it goes ahead and uses I O dot omit
to send that data to every single connected client because the account has changed all of them should
get notified.
Now we can go ahead and remove this line right here as it's commented out and not doing anything.
And I'll also remove those comments that I just pasted in in the next lesson.
It'll be up to you to do something similar though with functionality related to the chat app.
I'm really excited to get to that.
So stay tuned and I'll see you then.